[doc][KubeRay] Add NetworkPolicy user guide + kuberay namespace note (#65074)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/cluster/kubernetes/user-guides/network-policy.md

(kuberay-network-policy)=

# Configure RayCluster to use NetworkPolicies

The KubeRay operator can generate Kubernetes `NetworkPolicy` resources for each `RayCluster`. When enabled, the operator creates separate policies for the head pod and worker pods, and removes them when the cluster is deleted.

:::{warning}
NetworkPolicy support is alpha and disabled by default. Enable the `RayClusterNetworkPolicy` feature gate before using `spec.networkPolicy`.
:::

> 

Reviewer: Could we have a  "Prerequisites" section here similar to:

https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/e8bd0a28d660fe3f1c093ea80c53b1527b6b3ff7/doc/source/cluster/kubernetes/user-guides/configuring-ippr.md?plain=1#L40-L44

Showing the min version requirements for user to use this feature

> ## Enable the feature gate

Reviewer: For this section, I think it's enough to just have something similar to:

https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/e8bd0a28d660fe3f1c093ea80c53b1527b6b3ff7/doc/source/cluster/kubernetes/getting-started/raycronjob-quick-start.md?plain=1#L59-L69

```bash
helm get values kuberay-operator -n ray-system -o yaml > values-override.yaml
# edit values-override.yaml: set RayClusterNetworkPolicy enabled: true
helm upgrade kuberay-operator kuberay/kuberay-operator -n ray-system -f values-override.yaml
```

### Kustomize

Add a strategic merge patch to the operator `Deployment`. Because Kubernetes strategic merge patch replaces the `args` list rather than appending to it, include every feature gate you want active, not only the new one:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: kuberay-operator
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: kuberay-operator
        args:
        - --feature-gates=RayClusterStatusConditions=true,RayJobDeletionPolicy=true,RayMultiHostIndexing=true,RayServiceIncrementalUpgrade=false,RayCronJob=false,RayClusterMTLS=false,RayClusterNetworkPolicy=true
```

Adjust the list to match the gates your installation currently passes. If you're unsure, run `kubectl get deployment kuberay-operator -n ray-system -o jsonpath='{.spec.template.spec.containers[0].args}'` to inspect the live args before patching.

## Enable NetworkPolicy

> Add a `networkPolicy` field to `spec` and choose a mode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a `networkPolicy` field to the `RayCluster` `spec` and choose a mode:
```

```yaml
spec:
  networkPolicy:
    mode: DenyAll

> ```

Reviewer: Let's put make it more clear that it's `RayCluster` spec

```yaml
apiVersion: ray.io/v1
kind: RayCluster
spec:
    networkPolicy:
        mode: DenyAll
```

Three modes are available:

- **`DenyAll`**: deny all ingress and egress except intra-cluster pod traffic.
- **`DenyAllIngress`**: deny inbound traffic only; outbound is unrestricted.
- **`DenyAllEgress`**: deny outbound traffic only; inbound is unrestricted.

> In all modes, the operator always permits pod-to-pod traffic within the same `RayCluster` on all ports. For `DenyAll` and `DenyAllIngress`, the head pod policy also allows the submitter pod to reach the dashboard port when a `RayJob` running in `K8sJobMode` owns the cluster.

Reviewer: Could we show what are the default ingress / egress rules we will have? e.g. show the generated NetworkPolicy from `kubectl get networkpolicy <name> -o yaml` after deploying, or just paste the default settings in YAML

Reviewer: Sorry, after second thought, I think having bullet point is enough. Adding `kubectl describe` result here is less readable for users.

## Apply a namespace default-deny policy first

Ray cluster pods and their `NetworkPolicy` resources are created by different controllers asynchronously. A pod can start before its policy is applied, leaving a brief window where all traffic is permitted.

> To address this, pre-apply a namespace-level policy scoped to the directions your chosen mode manages. This closes the race window without interfering with the directions your mode leaves unrestricted.

Reviewer: This will apply to all pods in the namespace, including ones that are not managed by KubeRay. Maybe we can add a note saying that if user want to limit to KubeRay pods, use this label:

```yaml
podSelector:
    matchLabels:
        ray.io/is-ray-node: "yes"
```

Also if user set `DenyAll` or `DenyAllEgress`, it's recommended to add this label to exclude submitter pod, otherwise the RayJob will fail if they do not set extra rules to enable submitter pod egress.

spec:
  podSelector: {}
  policyTypes:
  - Ingress
  - Egress
```

**`DenyAllIngress`** — deny inbound only:

```yaml
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: NetworkPolicy
metadata:
  name: default-deny-ingress
  namespace: <your-ray-namespace>
spec:
  podSelector: {}
  policyTypes:
  - Ingress
```

**`DenyAllEgress`** — deny outbound only:

```yaml
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: NetworkPolicy
metadata:
  name: default-deny-egress
  namespace: <your-ray-namespace>
spec:
  podSelector: {}
  policyTypes:
  - Egress
```

The rules the operator generates are additive on top of whichever policy you apply. Kubernetes NetworkPolicy is allow-only — KubeRay's generated allow rules layer on top without needing to modify the namespace policy.

:::{warning}
Don't apply the `DenyAll` variant with `DenyAllIngress` or `DenyAllEgress` modes. It will silently block the direction those modes intentionally leave unrestricted, because KubeRay's generated policies can't override a namespace-level deny.
:::

## Required rules under DenyAll and DenyAllEgress

The operator doesn't add DNS or API server egress rules. Add both when using `DenyAll` or `DenyAllEgress`.

### DNS egress

> Workers reach the head node through its service FQDN. Without a DNS egress rule, workers can't resolve the head address and the cluster won't start. Add this rule to both `head.egressRules` and `worker.egressRules`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Workers reach the head node through its service FQDN. Without a DNS egress rule, workers can't resolve the head address and the cluster won't start. The operator doesn't add this rule by default because DNS deployments vary across clusters. Adjust the selector to match your cluster's DNS provider before applying. Add the rule to both `head.egressRules` and `worker.egressRules`:
```

Let's tell users that they may need to update the rule for their DNS provider

```yaml
spec:
  networkPolicy:
    mode: DenyAll
    head:
      egressRules:
      - to:
        - namespaceSelector:
            matchLabels:
              kubernetes.io/metadata.name: kube-system
          podSelector:
            matchLabels:
              k8s-app: kube-dns
        ports:
        - port: 53
          protocol: UDP
        - port: 53
          protocol: TCP
    worker:
      egressRules:
      - to:
        - namespaceSelector:
            matchLabels:
              kubernetes.io/metadata.name: kube-system
          podSelector:
            matchLabels:
              k8s-app: kube-dns
        ports:
        - port: 53
          protocol: UDP
        - port: 53
          protocol: TCP
```

### API server egress

When `enableInTreeAutoscaling: true`, the Ray autoscaler on the head pod must reach the Kubernetes API server to scale the cluster. The operator doesn't add this rule because the correct form depends on the CNI:

| CNI | Required form |
|---|---|
| kindnet, Calico, Antrea | `ipBlock` with the endpoint IP (post-DNAT) |
| Cilium | `CiliumNetworkPolicy` with `toEntities: [kube-apiserver]`; standard `ipBlock` doesn't work |

> | EKS (Amazon VPC CNI) | `ipBlock` with the `kubernetes` Service ClusterIP |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| CNI | Required form |
|---|---|
| kindnet | No rule needed — kindnet allows egress to the API server by default |
| Calico, Cilium (with `kube-proxy-replacement`) | `ipBlock` with the endpoint IP (post-DNAT); a ClusterIP rule blocks autoscaling |
| EKS (Amazon VPC CNI) | `ipBlock` with the `kubernetes` Service ClusterIP; an endpoint IP rule blocks autoscaling |

These results come from testing in [kuberay#4638](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/pull/4638#issuecomment-4660571594); other CNIs or configurations may behave differently.

Calico and Cilium also require `policyCIDRMatchMode: Node` set on the CNI (see [this issue](https://github.com/hcloud-k8s/terraform-hcloud-kubernetes/issues/285)) for the endpoint-IP `ipBlock` rule below to match. Without it, the rule may not take effect.
```

Let update to this, following our experiment results

Find the endpoint IP with:

```bash
kubectl get endpointslices -n default -l kubernetes.io/service-name=kubernetes
```

> For kindnet, Calico, and Antrea, add this rule to `head.egressRules`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Calico and Cilium, add this rule to `head.egressRules`:
```

```yaml
- to:
  - ipBlock:
      cidr: <endpoint-ip>/32
  ports:
  - port: 6443
    protocol: TCP
```

> For EKS, replace `<endpoint-ip>` with the ClusterIP from `kubectl get svc kubernetes`. For Cilium, create a `CiliumNetworkPolicy` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For EKS, replace `<endpoint-ip>` with the ClusterIP from `kubectl get svc kubernetes`. As a [suggested alternative for Cilium in kuberay#4638](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/pull/4638#discussion_r3336164401), you can instead use a `CiliumNetworkPolicy` with `toEntities: [kube-apiserver]` to target the API server by identity instead of IP. See Cilium's [Layer 3 policy docs](https://docs.cilium.io/en/stable/security/policy/layer3/) for details.
```

## RayJob patterns

### RayJob-owned clusters

When a `RayJob` in `K8sJobMode` creates and owns the `RayCluster`, the operator automatically injects an ingress rule allowing the submitter pod to reach the head dashboard port. No additional configuration is needed.

For `HTTPMode` and `SidecarMode`, there is no standalone submitter pod, so no additional ingress rule is required.

> ### Standalone clusters with clusterSelector

Reviewer: Please correct me if I'm wrong, I might missed some discussions. Based on comment: https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/pull/4638#discussion_r3379666348, I think option 2 shared opt-in access label is more recommended?

Author: Hey yes thanks for catching that. We can drop the `ray.io/originated-from-cr-name: <rayjob-name>` and clarify the use-cases in the initial text. cc [@Nolbag](https://github.com/Nolbag)

Author: That is, if we want to clarify that a user can use the broader rule to achieve the same result or else create their own opt-in label. Does that make sense and which is your preference? I went with this approach in the controller because it still provides a user with the ability to use a broader rule while preserving the ability to fall back on a templated system that doesn't need them to label their own submitter pod.

Reviewer: I think option 2 (self-defined opt-in label) is better. It lets many RayJobs share one cluster without editing the RayCluster per job, while still limiting which RayJobs can access it.

Only dropping `ray.io/originated-from-cr-name: <rayjob-name>` would grant head access to every RayJob in the namespace, which goes against the purpose of restricting traffic.

When a `RayJob` targets a pre-existing cluster with `clusterSelector`, the cluster has no `RayJob` owner reference. The operator can't automatically add a submitter ingress rule. In `K8sJobMode`, KubeRay stamps the submitter pod with stable identity labels, so you can match them directly:

```yaml
spec:
  networkPolicy:
    mode: DenyAll
    head:
      ingressRules:
      - from:
        - podSelector:
            matchLabels:
              ray.io/originated-from-cr-name: <rayjob-name>
              ray.io/originated-from-crd: RayJob
        ports:
        - port: 8265
          protocol: TCP
```

Replace `<rayjob-name>` with the name of the submitting `RayJob`.

## Custom rules

> Add per-role rules under `head` and `worker`. The operator appends them to the base policy for that role and doesn't apply head rules to workers or vice versa.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add rules under `head` or `worker` to target that role's policy. The operator appends `head` rules only to the head pod's policy, and `worker` rules only to worker pods' policy.
```

  networkPolicy:
    mode: DenyAll
    head:
      ingressRules:
      - from:
        - namespaceSelector:
            matchLabels:
              kubernetes.io/metadata.name: <prometheus-namespace>
        ports:
        - port: 8080
          protocol: TCP
```

### Allow worker egress to external services

To allow workers to pull packages or reach external APIs, add an egress rule:

```yaml
spec:
  networkPolicy:
    mode: DenyAll
    worker:
      egressRules:
      - to:
        - ipBlock:
            cidr: 0.0.0.0/0
        ports:
        - port: 443
          protocol: TCP
```

### Per-worker-group rules

Each worker group defaults to the rules defined in `worker`. To override rules for a specific group, add an entry under `workerGroups`. This replaces the `worker` rules entirely for that group.
```yaml
spec:
  networkPolicy:
    mode: DenyAll
    worker:
      egressRules:
      - to:
        - ipBlock:
            cidr: 0.0.0.0/0
        ports:
        - port: 443
          protocol: TCP
    workerGroups:
    - groupName: gpu-group
      egressRules:
      - to:
        - ipBlock:
            cidr: 10.0.0.0/8
        ports:
        - port: 8080
          protocol: TCP

> 

Reviewer: missing ``` here

Reviewer 2: Thanks @machichima. Added the missing backticks

:::{warning}
NetworkPolicy support is alpha and disabled by default. Enable the `RayClusterNetworkPolicy` feature gate before using `spec.networkPolicy`.
:::

## Prerequisites

- KubeRay operator v1.7 or later installed.
- `kubectl` installed and configured to interact with your cluster.

## Install the KubeRay operator

Install the KubeRay operator, following [these instructions](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/cluster/kubernetes/getting-started/kuberay-operator-installation.html). The minimum version for this guide is v1.7.0. To use this feature, you must enable the `RayClusterNetworkPolicy` feature gate. To enable the feature gate when installing the KubeRay operator, run the following command:

```sh
helm repo add kuberay https://ray-project.github.io/kuberay-helm/
helm repo update

# Install KubeRay operator v1.7.0 with the RayClusterNetworkPolicy feature gate enabled
helm install kuberay-operator kuberay/kuberay-operator \
  --version 1.7.0 \
  --set "featureGates[0].name=RayClusterNetworkPolicy" \
  --set "featureGates[0].enabled=true"
```

## Enable NetworkPolicy

> Add a `networkPolicy` field to the `RayCluster` `spec` and choose a mode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a `networkPolicy` field to the `RayCluster` spec and choose a mode:
```

## RayJob patterns

### RayJob-owned clusters

When a `RayJob` in `K8sJobMode` creates and owns the `RayCluster`, the operator automatically injects an ingress rule allowing the submitter pod to reach the head dashboard port. No additional configuration is needed.

For `HTTPMode` and `SidecarMode`, there is no standalone submitter pod, so no additional ingress rule is required.

### Standalone clusters with clusterSelector

When a `RayJob` targets a pre-existing cluster with `clusterSelector`, the cluster has no `RayJob` owner reference. The operator can't automatically add a submitter ingress rule. In `K8sJobMode`, KubeRay stamps the submitter pod with stable identity labels, so you can match them directly. This allows any RayJob submitter in the namespace to reach the head dashboard port.

```yaml
spec:
  networkPolicy:
    mode: DenyAll
    head:
      ingressRules:
      - from:
        - podSelector:
            matchLabels:
              ray.io/originated-from-crd: RayJob
        ports:
        - port: 8265
          protocol: TCP
```

To restrict access to a single specific job, add ray.io/originated-from-cr-name: <rayjob-name> to the matchLabels.

## Custom rules

> Add rules under `head` or `worker` to target that role's policy. The operator appends `head` rules only to the head pod's policy, and `worker` rules only to worker pods' policy.

Reviewer: User could also set rules for each worker group through `workerGroups` (added in https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/pull/5028). Could you also mention it here and add an example below for configuring per worker group?

Also, please mention that for each worker group, it'll defaults to the rules set in `worker`, and will be "replace" by the `workerGroups` entry if set
